---
layout: post
title: Evaluating the relationship between Demographical Characteristics and Blood Pressure
---

Utilizing Large Sample Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) Regression to evaluate the association between Age and Blood Pressure. Data was sourced from the 2007-2008 National Health & Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), and all data cleaning, analysis, and model building were conducted using the R programming language.

## Introduction
High blood pressure, also known as hypertension, is a silent but deadly condition that nearly half of all adults claim victim to. It is estimated nearly half of those adults who have it are unaware that they do, which is especially dangerous as it can lead to multiple lethal conditions. These factors make it one of the leading causes of premature death worldwide and it has cost the United States around $131 Billion a year from 2003 - 2014. We believe understanding how blood pressure interacts with our individual qualities is crucial for shedding light on its hidden impact, so the focus of our work is to spread awareness and motivate proactive action to our readers. Our research question is: Is there a relationship between age and blood pressure?

Since hypertension is known to be most prevalent in adults, we believe it is of utmost importance to further understand the relationship with age. We decided to explore sex’s relationship with blood pressure as well, since prior research shows that men have higher rates of hypertension1. Another area of interest is household income, so we may see if there are any potential disparities amongst those less fortunate. Lastly, we will explore BMI (Body Mass Index) which gives readers insight into a characteristic that they are able to act upon. To quantify and determine the significance of these relationships, we will be using a linear regression model.

## Data Wrangling & Exploration


The dataset we used is from the 2007-2008 National Health & Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a nationwide survey conducted in the U.S. by the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. To select the participants, all the counties in the U.S. are split into groups, then one county is selected from each group. Post this, selected counties are divided into smaller groups (such as neighborhoods) where houses are randomly sampled from each. Most interviews are conducted in the participants’ home and the whole household is interviewed when possible, followed by health examinations at laboratory centers with full reimbursement for the participant. Out of 12,946 selected individuals, 10,149 (78.4%) participated in interviews, and 9,762 (75.4%) underwent laboratory examinations, providing the following data for blood pressure metrics.

Blood pressure: We used an average of the 3 systolic blood pressure readings (mmHg) to reduce any effects of irregular readings. We chose systolic as opposed to diastolic blood pressure since research shows it is a better predictor for risk of heart disease. 
Age: Age (years) was available as a metric variable in the dataset and topcoded at 80 years.
Sex: We created a dummy variable with females as 1 and males as 0. 
Household income: This was split into 15 income brackets in the NHANES data. The 2007 median household income was $52,673 but given the absence of an exact match in income brackets, we opted for $55k as an approximation. This led to the creation of a binary variable: 1 for incomes above the median, and 0 otherwise.
Body Mass Index (BMI): BMI was available in the NHANES dataset as a metric variable.
The initial dataset comprised of 9,762 rows containing blood pressure readings. We removed any participants who had food, alcohol, coffee or cigarettes 30 minutes prior to their lab test, since this could influence blood pressure readings which we are not controlling for. Additionally, any participants with null values in the features we operationalized were removed for data completeness. Post-cleaning, we had 4,546 data points remaining, which were partitioned into 1,363 exploration rows and 3,183 confirmation rows through a random split. 

The following scatter plot shows the relationship between age and blood pressure with a fitted regression line. Overall, there seems to be a positive association between age and blood pressure. We also explored other scatter plots that highlighted how different features such as sex, BMI and household income interact with age & blood pressure. We noticed that each category had a different slope, alluding to their interacting impact on age and blood pressure.

## Model Specification & Assumptions 

In our first model, we looked at the correlation between age and blood pressure since age is our key area of interest. In our second model, we included all features of interest: age, sex, BMI, and household income. While assessing possible log or polynomial transformations for our variables, we found none that improved the distribution of our data. Lastly, in our third model, we included interaction terms for all of the aforementioned covariates against age, in order to gauge their relationships with one another. 

Given our data set has well over 100 observations, we are following the assumptions for a large sample model. This means we assume that the variables are independent and identically distributed and that a unique best linear predictor exists. The data was collected by the CDC in a stratified random sample, but in some cases entire households were sampled, creating a potential lack of independence. Additionally, to check for the unique best linear predictor, we checked for multicollinearity using the variance inflation factor, and found that all factors are around 1, indicating no concerns for multicollinearity. We also examined histograms of all variables to check for potential signs of heavy tailed distributions.

## Model Results and Interpretation

In our first model, our coefficient for age is 0.482, meaning that on average for a one year increase in age there is a 0.482 increase in blood pressure when holding all else constant. In our second model, the resulting coefficient of age stayed fairly consistent, and all other features were highly significant. We also see an increase in adjusted R-squared indicating better explained variance by the second model. 

The inclusion of interaction terms in our third model means the interpretation of age’s effect on blood pressure is now dependent on the values of the other covariates. As an example, a male with a fairly average BMI of 27 whose household income is below the median will see a 0.383 increase in blood pressure on average for every year of age, with a constant value of 106.286 and when holding all else constant. On the other hand, a woman with the same BMI whose household income is above the median will see an average 0.453 increase in blood pressure with every year of age, with a constant value of 99.007 and holding all else constant. The R2 of 0.37 means the independent variables explained the variation in the dependent variable 37% of the time. 

Since hypertension stages are typically 10 mmHg apart, with stage 1 hypertension within just 11 mmHg of normal levels, we find that our coefficients are practically significant as even just 1 mmHg increase can mean you are around 9-10% closer to the next stage and likely to require different treatment as a result. Overall, our statistics for coefficients have p-values below 0.01 which allows us to reject the null hypothesis that there is no relationship between age and blood pressure. 

##  Conclusion

This study sheds light on the complex relationships between age, sex, household income, and BMI on blood pressure, offering valuable insights for personalized health management and risk factors. By recognizing the broader impact of these factors on cardiovascular health, individuals can take proactive steps towards improving their well-being as they age and reducing the risk of hypertension-related complications.

